Add blog post describing the `returndatacopy` bug and fix. (#198)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2026-04-21-unusedstore-eliminator-stale-returndatasize-bug.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'UnusedStoreEliminator Stale Return Data Size Bug'

> date: '2026-04-21'

Reviewer: Just a heads up that date needs to be updated.

author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On January 17, 2026, a bug in the Yul optimizer was reported by **Carl Andersen** from [Spearbit](https://spearbit.com). The bug could cause `returndatacopy` operations to be incorrectly removed. It has been assigned identifier **SOL-2026-2** and name **UnusedStoreEliminatorStaleReturnDataSize**.

The bug is fixed in Solidity **0.8.35**.

## Summary

> The Yul optimizer's `UnusedStoreEliminator` pass could incorrectly remove `returndatacopy(...)` operations when the length argument was supplied from a `returndatasize()` value that had become stale due to an intervening call opcode. Because `returndatacopy` reverts on out-of-bounds access, removing it in this case silently suppresses a revert that should have occurred, allowing execution to continue past a point where it should have stopped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Yul optimizer's `UnusedStoreEliminator` step could incorrectly remove `returndatacopy()` operations when the length argument was supplied from a `returndatasize()` value that had become stale due to an intervening call opcode. Because `returndatacopy` reverts on out-of-bounds access, removing it in this case silently suppresses a revert that should have occurred, allowing execution to continue past a point where it should have stopped.
```

Reviewer: By the way, I think it's a good convention to have a line break after every sentence. Makes diffs clearer and smaller, but also does not require an annoying rewrap after each change like a fixed line width does.

> The bug only affects **handwritten Yul or inline assembly** code. High-level Solidity code was never affected. The severity is rated **very low**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bug only affects **handwritten Yul or inline assembly** code. High-level Solidity code never produces the affected pattern. The severity is rated **very low**.
```

## Technical Background

> The `UnusedStoreEliminator` is an optimizer step in the Yul pipeline that removes write operations (to memory or storage) whose results are provably never read. Eligible operations include `mstore`, `mstore8`, `codecopy`, `calldatacopy`, `extcodecopy`, and — since version 0.8.13 — `returndatacopy`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `UnusedStoreEliminator` is an optimizer step in the Yul pipeline that removes write operations (to memory or storage) whose results are provably never read. Eligible memory operations include `mstore`, `mstore8`, `codecopy`, `calldatacopy`, `extcodecopy`, and — since version 0.8.13 — `returndatacopy`.
```

Otherwise the list should include `sstore` as well.

> The `returndatacopy` instruction is special among memory-copying opcodes: unlike `calldatacopy` or `codecopy`, it **reverts** when accessing bytes beyond the bounds of the return data buffer. Since reverts are a side effect the optimizer must preserve, a `returndatacopy` can only be removed when it is certain that it will never access out-of-bounds memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `returndatacopy` instruction has an odd quirk that other memory-copying opcodes don't have: unlike `calldatacopy` or `codecopy`, it **reverts** when accessing bytes beyond the bounds of the input data buffer. Since reverts are a side effect the optimizer must preserve, a `returndatacopy` can only be removed when it is certain that it will never access out-of-bounds memory.
```

Saying that it's "special" makes it sound like this behavior is justified. This should be worded more strongly. In fact, this is a good opportunity to emphasize how annoying this behavior is for compilers (and that [EOF would have fixed it](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7069#returndataload-and-returndatacopy-padding-behavior)).

> The only pattern where this can be guaranteed statically is `returndatacopy(0, 0, returndatasize())` — copying the entire return data buffer from the beginning. This is also the exact pattern emitted by the Solidity code generator for handling return data from external calls. Starting in 0.8.13, the optimizer was special-cased to recognize and remove only this pattern.

Reviewer: It's not the only one. Just the only one we cared about due to the fact that it's emitted by the codegen.

```suggestion
One of the patterns where this can be guaranteed statically is `returndatacopy(0, 0, returndatasize())` — copying the entire return data buffer from the beginning. This is also the exact pattern emitted by the Solidity code generator for handling return data from external calls. Starting in 0.8.13, the optimizer was special-cased to recognize and remove only this pattern.
```

## The Bug

The special-case check introduced in 0.8.13 was incomplete. It correctly identified calls of the form:

```yul
let s := returndatasize()
returndatacopy(0, 0, s)
```

as equivalent to `returndatacopy(0, 0, returndatasize())` and allowed them to be removed. However, it **did not account for the possibility that the variable `s` could become stale**. The return data buffer — and therefore the valid range for `returndatasize()` — is reset by any of the following opcodes: `call`, `staticcall`, `delegatecall`, and `callcode`. If any such opcode appears between the assignment of `s` and the `returndatacopy`, the stored size no longer reflects the current return buffer, and the check is no longer sound.

Consider the following Yul snippet:

```yul
{

>     let s := returndatasize()   // capture size before first call
>     pop(call(gas(), addr, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0))  // this resets the return data buffer!
>     returndatacopy(0, 0, s)    // s is now stale — buffer may be smaller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    let s := returndatasize()              // capture size before first call
    pop(call(gas(), addr, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0))  // this resets the return data buffer!
    returndatacopy(0, 0, s)                // s is now stale — buffer may be smaller
```

}
```

> Before the fix, the optimizer would recognize the `returndatacopy(0, 0, s)` pattern — `s` is a variable holding a `returndatasize()` value and the start offset is zero — and allow the entire `returndatacopy` to be removed as if it were safe. In reality, since the `call` in between may have changed the return data buffer to a size smaller than `s`, the `returndatacopy` would revert with an out-of-bounds access. Removing it suppresses that revert, allowing execution to continue incorrectly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the fix, the optimizer would recognize the `returndatacopy(0, 0, s)` pattern — `s` is a variable holding a `returndatasize()` value and the start offset is zero — and allow the entire `returndatacopy` to be removed as if it were safe. In reality, since the `call` in between may have changed the return data buffer to a size smaller than `s`, the `returndatacopy` would revert on an out-of-bounds access. Removing it suppresses that revert, allowing execution to continue incorrectly.
```

The analogous inline assembly pattern in Solidity is:

```solidity
contract C {
    function f(address addr) external {
        assembly {
            let s := returndatasize()
            pop(call(gas(), addr, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0))
            // Bug: this returndatacopy was incorrectly removed by the optimizer
            returndatacopy(0, 0, s)
        }
    }
}
```

## Impact

**Affected versions:** 0.8.13 – 0.8.34

> **Required conditions for the bug to trigger:**

Reviewer: Conditions that trigger the bug should be more prominent. We always put them as one of the first things in the post. I don't think they fit in the "Impact" section anyway.

They should also be more concise. The additional explanations, like why the high-level code is not affected or when the optimizer is enabled should be discussed separately. The list is very important as quick assessment criteria for people to check if they're affected.

> - The Yul optimizer must be enabled (this is the default in production compilations with `--optimize`).

Reviewer: It's not the default. If you meant that it's the default in frameworks or something, please be more specific. Otherwise it sounds like it's the default in the compiler.

> - The EVM version must be at least Byzantium (the first version to introduce `returndatacopy` and `returndatasize`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The target EVM version must be at least `byzantium` (the first version to introduce `returndatacopy` and `returndatasize`).
```

- The affected code pattern must appear in **inline assembly or handwritten Yul**. The Solidity code generator itself never produces code interleaving multiple external calls with access to a previous call's return data, so high-level Solidity code is not affected.
- The memory region written by `returndatacopy` must **not be read afterward**. The `UnusedStoreEliminator` only removes a write operation when it can prove the written memory is never subsequently read. If any later instruction reads from the same memory region, the store is kept regardless of the pattern match.

> **Effect:** A `returndatacopy` that would have reverted due to an out-of-bounds access is silently removed, causing execution to continue when it should have stopped. The memory region targeted by the copy is never written; the program proceeds with stale memory contents and no revert occurs. The practical impact depends on how that memory is used afterward, but given the specific conditions required to trigger the bug, real-world impact is expected to be minimal.

Reviewer: This focuses a bit too much on the mechanics of what happens when the bug is triggered.
That bit is obvious - revert does not happen so code that should not be executed is executed. Not much more needs to be said.

On the other hand it does not get deep enough into the practical impact, i.e. how likely this is to impact anyone in the first place. The important thing to mention is that we don't think anyone is likely to intentionally write assembly using `returndatacopy()` with a stale `returndatasize()` value. We'd not expect other code generators that emit Yul to produce such code either. It's more likely to be a mistake than something intentional. This severely limits the real-world impact.

Then, even if someone did that, they may still not even be aware that the instruction is supposed to revert on out-of-bounds access (that's not a usual property of other similar instructions), so removing the revert may not be harmful.

And even then, the removal of the revert is the only effect. The bug would not make the compiler remove `returndatacopy()` whose result is used, so the bug would never result in the wrong value being returned by the call.

Reviewer: Damn, having written this like this makes me question if this even deserves `very low` severity. Back when we decided it's a security issue we were assuming that the optimization is actually effective sometimes. But as we go deeper into it it's starting to look that this is less and less likely to affect anyone.

The severity is rated **very low** because the pattern that triggers it only arises in manually written assembly and is highly unlikely to appear in typical production code.

## Workaround

> If you are using a version between 0.8.13 and 0.8.34 and your code uses `returndatacopy` in inline assembly or Yul following an external call, avoid storing the result of `returndatasize()` in a variable before the call and using it as the length argument afterward. Instead, call `returndatasize()` fresh at the point of `returndatacopy`:

Reviewer: I'm not sure it makes sense to include such a workaround. Like, if your `returndatasize()` is not stale, you're safe. And if it's not, the workaround will break it, but why are you trying to use a stale `returndatasize()` in the first place?

```solidity
// Safe: always reads the current return data size
assembly {
    pop(call(gas(), addr, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0))
    returndatacopy(0, 0, returndatasize())
}
```

## The Fix

> The fix, implemented in [PR #16508](https://github.com/argotorg/solidity/pull/16508), takes the conservative approach of **removing the `returndatacopy` optimization entirely** from the `UnusedStoreEliminator`. The `RETURNDATACOPY` instruction is now unconditionally blacklisted from removal alongside `MCOPY`.

Reviewer: This needs some detail on why we thought removing the optimization is a good idea.

The relevant change in `UnusedStoreEliminator.cpp` is:

```cpp
// Before (0.8.13–0.8.34): RETURNDATACOPY was a candidate for removal
// with a special-case check for the (0, 0, returndatasize()) pattern.

// After (0.8.35): RETURNDATACOPY is blacklisted unconditionally.
bool const isBlacklisted =
    *instruction == Instruction::MCOPY ||
    *instruction == Instruction::RETURNDATACOPY;
bool const isCandidateForRemoval =
    !isBlacklisted &&
    SemanticInformation::otherState(*instruction) != SemanticInformation::Write && (
        SemanticInformation::storage(*instruction) == SemanticInformation::Write ||
        (!m_ignoreMemory && SemanticInformation::memory(*instruction) == SemanticInformation::Write)
    );
```

## Timeline

| Date | Event |
|------|-------|
| 2022-05-17 | Optimization first introduced in 0.8.13 (partial fix for out-of-bounds revert preservation) |
| 2026-01-17 | Bug reported by Carl Andersen from Spearbit |
| 2026-04-17 | Fix committed in PR #16508 |

> | 2026-XX-XX | Fixed in Solidity 0.8.35 |

Reviewer: We don't normally include the timeline in such posts. And I don't think it's that important.
